---
layout: research
category: research
subcategory: genealogy
title: Irish Canadians
---

Excerpts from Peter Toner, "Irish Canadians," *The Canadian Encyclopedia*, May 29, 2008, <https://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/irish>. Researched and collected by [[(7) Lorraine Fitzpatrick]].

> While it has been argued (with little supporting evidence) that Irish explorers such as Brendan the Bold preceded the Norse to Canada, such wishful thinking is not necessary to establish the significance of the Irish contribution to Canada. Since the 17th century, because of political and military links between France and southern Ireland, the Irish have lived in what is now Canada. The Irish may have constituted as much as five percent of the population of New France. Indeed, some ‘French Canadian’ and ‘Acadian’ surnames derive from a corruption of Irish names, e.g. Riel (from Reilly) and Caissie (from Casey).

> There have also been Irish in Newfoundland since the early 18th century, if not before. “Bristol” fishing vessels habitually stopped at Wexford and Waterford to take on provisions and an Irish crew and labourers for the Newfoundland fishery. There is some indication from New France and Newfoundland that among the Irish at this time there existed a measure of group consciousness, especially in Newfoundland where the Irish population continued to increase until the middle of the 19th century. During the 18th century, smaller groups of Irish began to arrive in the new British colonies.

> The migrations of the 17th and 18th centuries had little permanent impact on Canada, except in Newfoundland where many Irish worked as fishermen and lived in the kind of dire poverty they had hoped to escape by migration to the New World.

> The most important single feature of the Irish, both in Ireland and in Canada, is that they have been divided into two different and mutually hostile groups. This division is so fundamental that the Irish might be considered two ethnic groups. Although it is common practice to refer to Irish people as either Catholic or Protestant, religion itself has never been much more than the easiest determinant of a group affiliation that consists of many factors. The Catholics perceive themselves to be the representatives of the original inhabitants of Ireland, while the Protestants represent the Scots and English colonists who arrived in Ireland when it was under British rule. Because the Catholics were socially and politically disadvantaged in Ireland, they arrived in Canada with few advantages other than a familiarity with the English language and British institutions. They lacked the means to establish themselves securely within the economy and had little impact on the business community. The Catholic Church, an important institution for the Catholic Irish in Ireland, was shared by the French, and helped the Irish in the difficult process of integration into Canadian society.

> The Protestant Irish, in contrast, generally had more money and found it significantly easier to re-establish themselves as farmers. They became one of the most agrarian of groups in 19th century Canada. Because their religion made them more acceptable to the dominant society, they were able to move much more freely in Canadian society.

> Over the past 150 years, the term Irish has acquired a Catholic connotation. The Catholic Church, the institutional bedrock of the Catholic Irish community in Canada, laboured to gain acceptance for its people, which meant that Irish priests and bishops were often opposed to any manifestations of sympathy for nationalism in Ireland. For the Irish in the United States, there was no such problem, because there it was possible to be a good Irishman, a good Catholic and a good American. But in Canada, where citizenship remained British for so long, it was extremely difficult to be Irish politically and a good citizen as well. It was also difficult at times to be Irish and a good Catholic. For example, the Fenian Brotherhood, whose aim was to free Ireland by force of arms, was very popular among the Irish in the U. S., but in Canada the Fenians (though few in number) were considered seditious by the government, considered dangerous by the Protestants, and were viewed as an embarrassment by the Catholic Church and by respectable Catholic Irish.

> As English-speaking Catholics, the Catholic Irish in Canada found themselves at odds with French-speaking Catholics as well as with the Protestant majority. Because of the sense of isolation among the Catholic Irish, a sense of identity was stronger among them than among the Protestant Irish.

> The Protestant Irish have sustained a powerful belief in institutional strength, and have clung to structures tenaciously. Stability is seen to be their greatest virtue. By contrast, the Catholic Irish define power in personal terms to a degree which may seem anarchistic, but which represents a survival of the patron-client relationship, the basis of politics in rural Ireland. The talent of the Catholic Irish in Canada and elsewhere has been that they could translate this personal approach to politics and to power brokerage in the modern setting.
