---
layout: about
category: about
title: LinkedIn
date: 2023-05-25
---

I am a Development Director on the EA Sports FC Connected Modes team, currently supporting the launch of FC 24. Previously, I worked as a Development Manager on the FIFA Gameplay and Game Modes teams to help launch FIFA 23. I consider myself a product-oriented project manager, working closely with production and engineering to deliver game-changing features on time and to quality.

Outside of day-to-day game production at EA, I teach game development at TWU, covering topics as wide ranging as project management, interactive storytelling, and videogame aesthetics. I've supervised many successful student game projects, and have also supported students in their industry field placements. I work hard to not only train my students in essential games industry skills but to cultivate in them an ethical, people-first mentality.

I have a background in academic game studies, focusing on the philosophy of games and play, gameplay dynamics, and narrative design. I've presented my research at conferences like the Canadian Game Studies Association conference, the International Conference on Games and Narrative, and the Southwest Popular and American Culture Association conference. Over the last several years I have also maintained a critical design practice, publishing a large catalogue of tabletop roleplaying games on itch.io that use the medium of analog play to explore questions of identity, belief, and social action.

I love games, whether they are played on the couch, at the table, or on the pitch. There is nothing that I ever wanted to do more than to get to make the kinds of interactive artwork that I love to experience.
